https://www.theguardian.com/society/2018/feb/21/nhs-deficit-and-staff-shortage-data-held-up-by-government

NHS deficit and staff shortage data ‘held up’ by government

Author: Denis Campbell

Report showing NHS facing £900m deficit delayed after health department intervened

The NHS’s financial regulator has delayed publishing new information about the health service’s serious shortages of both money and staff after lobbying by the government, the Guardian can reveal.

The figures show that the NHS’s finances are even worse than previously thought – and include new official figures that reveal for the first time the full extent of the health service’s widespread lack of doctors and nurses.

NHS Improvement (NHSI) was originally due to make its latest quarterly assessment of the NHS in England’s performance available on Monday 19 February. However, it later said the report would be delayed but did not explain the hold-up.

The document is now set to be published on Wednesday after a 48-hour delay that senior NHS sources with knowledge of the situation said was linked to interventions by Jeremy Hunt’s Department of Health and Social Care.

NHSI’s findings are likely to prompt renewed criticism of the Conservatives’ handling of the NHS. They will show that NHS trusts that care for patients in England are now expected to end 2018-19 about £900m in deficit – far more than the £500m original target that ministers and NHS bosses hoped hospitals would stick to.

That is more than the £791m deficit that the NHS provider sector recorded last year and will provoke fresh claims that the government is giving the service too little money to do its job properly. Hospitals have ended up deeper in the red than expected because they recently missed out on over £100m of income as a result of NHS England’s unprecedented cancellation of an estimated 50,000 planned operations this winter. They have also had to spend money hiring extra staff and opening overflow wards to cope with demand since December.

Critics say that the true overshoot is closer to £1.3bn as the £900m figure does not include £350m of emergency funding to cope with the extra demand for care over this winter that Philip Hammond provided in the budget last November.

Labour accused ministers of trying to “cover up evidence of their failures” on the NHS. “It‘s a huge worry that NHS Improvement’s regular update on NHS finances has been postponed from Monday,” said shadow health secretary Jonathan Ashworth.

“The half-year report was already predicting a year-end deficit of £623m so people will be worrying about how much worse things have got and why it’s being covered up like this.”

The report will also set out, for the first time, the NHS’s own estimate of the number of vacancies it has. That is based on information supplied by trusts for how many doctors, nurses and every other type of staff they were short of in December. The NHS, health charities and medical and patient groups have been warning that the sheer number of rota gaps is putting patient safety and quality of care at risk.

Prof Anita Charlesworth, director of research and economics at the Health Foundation thinktank, said: “It is not surprising that the huge pressures on the health service at the end of last year, which saw the percentage of A&E patients treated within four hours fall to its lowest level ever in December, have also hit hospital budgets. Cancelled operations impact on patients and hit the bottom line as hospitals are paid for each patient they treat.”

The health department refused to answer questions about conversations with NHSI in advance of the report’s publication. A spokesperson said only: “The department has not been given a copy of the NHS Improvement Q3 report but we understand it will be published this week.”
