https://nypost.com/2018/02/05/trump-bungles-effort-to-slam-uk-universal-health-care-system/

Trump bungles effort to slam UK universal health care system

Author: Bob Fredericks

President Trump on Monday slammed Britain’s national health care system — but mistakenly described a demonstration in favor of expanding it as a protest against it.

“The Democrats are pushing for Universal HealthCare while thousands of people are marching in the UK because their U system is going broke and not working. Dems want to greatly raise taxes for really bad and non-personal medical care. No thanks!” the president tweeted at 7:11 a.m.

Trump’s tweet came moments after Nigel Farage, a British politician and one of the leaders of the Brexit movement, complained on “Fox & Friends” about the UK’s National Health Service being swamped by immigrants.

“Well the big problem we’ve got is a population crisis caused by government policy on immigration,” Farage said.

“The National Health Service has turned into the International Health Service and we’re providing a lot of health care for people coming into Britain from all over the world.”

But the marchers were supporters of the program and were calling for more government funding — and a rep for Prime Minister Theresa May fired back at the president, according to the Guardian.

“The prime minister is proud of our NHS, that is free at the point of delivery,” the spokesman said, adding that funding “is at a record high and was prioritized in the budget with an extra 2.8 billion pounds. In the recent Commonwealth Fund international survey, the NHS was rated the best in the world for a second time.”

Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt also took a shot at the commander-in-chief.

“I may disagree with claims made on that march but not ONE of them wants to live in a system where 28m people have no cover. NHS may have challenges but I’m proud to be from the country that invented universal coverage – where all get care no matter the size of their bank balance,” he tweeted, referring to the US.

Relations have been tense between Trump, May and some other UK officials over the president’s criticism of London’s mayor after a terror attack and Trump’s retweeting of anti-Islam videos posted by a fringe anti-immigrant group.

Trump has reportedly postponed a state visit to one of America’s closest allies because of concerns he would be met by mass protests.
