https://www.mirror.co.uk/news/politics/nhs-fix-now-protest-times-11959515

When is the NHS 'Fix It Now' protest? Times, speakers and how to get involved in the Downing Street rally

Author: Mikey Smith

Campaigners will challenge Jeremy Hunt to properly fund the NHS at a rally in Central London

Campaigners will challenge Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt to properly fund the NHS, with a mass rally in central London this weekend.

Tens of thousands are expected to march on Downing Street to demand an end to the funding crisis in the Health Service.

The 'Fix It Now' march organised by Health Campaigns Together and the People’s Assembly will snake through the capital, with marchers demanding more beds, more staff and more funds from the Tory Health Secretary.

But when and where will the protest take place? And what's the best way to get involved?

Here's everything you need to know.

Where and when is the protest?

The March will take place in central London on Saturday February 3.

Protesters will assemble at midday on Gower Street, before marching to Downing Street.

Who's speaking at the event and what time are they on?

Speakers at the start of the rally (Gower Street)

Rufus Hound - comedian / actor
Jac Berry - Nurse
Tony O'sullivan - KONP
Filipino Activist Network
HRI campaign
Health Campaigns Together
People's Assembly
National Health Singers

Speakers at the end of the rally (Downing Street - from 2.15pm to 3.30pm)

Chairs: Steve Turner (Unite & People's Assembly) & Louise Irvine (HCT)
Jon Ashworth - Labour
Johnathan Bartley - Green Party
Ralf Little - Actor
Piers Agget - Rudimental
Paul Nowak - TUC
Cecilia Anim - RCN
Helga Pile - Unison
Sarah Carpenter - Unite
Disabled People Against Cuts
Sam Fairbairn - People’s Assembly -
Aislinn Doherty - Health Campaigns Together
Kevin Courtney - NEU
Nicky Romoro - Mother of Becky Romoro who died because of lack of NHS recourses
David Bailey - Senior A&E nurse

What else might happen?

Actor Ralf Little has issued an open letter to Jeremy Hunt to meet with him at the rally to discuss issues of funding around the Health Service.

What if I can't make it to the protest?

We'll have full coverage of the march as it happens here on MirrorPolitics
